April 1, 1976. This is Tommy Moorhead, 9-11 Lazy
Lane, Bryan, Texas, by Roger Ferguson as part of an
oral history project, the Bryan College Station
area. Tommy, how long have you been in this area? I
was born and raised here, so in June it will be 23
years. 23 years. How about your descendants? How
long have they been in this area? On my mother's
side, for as long as we know of, I know for a fact that
my great-grandfather homesteaded here in the
Steep Hollow area. We have some proof that they
were here in this general area. I don't know
exactly where since prior to the Civil War. We've
got letters that have been sent back to some of our
relatives that we've kept from that day. Why did
they come to this area? why they chose this
particular area to settle in? They were
homesteaders looking for land. They were
primarily farmers and chose the St. Paul area
right outside what is today Brown and College
Station as prime farmland and decided to settle
there. So they were mostly farmers, is that right?
That's correct. Later on, though, my grandfather
was in the dairy business when my mother was a
child. And raised dairy cattle and sold milk in the
general area here. How about your ancestry?
Moorhead, what kind of name is that? Moorhead is
Indian. My father's from East Texas. He didn't
come to this area until 1946, although he did have
some relatives here earlier.
In fact, his aunt, who is my great-aunt, was the
first woman sheriff in Texas. Oh, really? Her
husband, who was named Leonard Moorhead, who my
father is named after, was sheriff here in the
early 1900s. And at one time, he had caught a
fugitive and had him sent to prison. And in the
courtroom, the... person stood up in court and
vowed that he would get my uncle. And so later on he
had been sent to an insane asylum and he escaped
from there and was out at the old steep hall of
church one night and snuck up in the bushes and put a
pistol up to the window and shot my uncle in the head
and killed him. That's not really funny. I know
it's not. It's a bit unusual though. Anyway, he
killed my uncle and my aunt, whose name she
remarried later and may be found in some of the
documents of history that are in brine today. Her
name was changed to Lila Withers later on. And Aunt
Lila swore out revenge on this particular person
and loaded up a posse and went out and captured him
and brought him back into town and he was sent away
once again to stay. And my aunt took over and filled
my uncle's shoes as sheriff of Rhyne and became the
first woman sheriff in the state of Texas and then
was later elected in her own right to be sheriff of
the town. She tells a lot of stories. She just died
about a year ago now in her mid-90s, I guess it was.
And she used to tell me stories as a child of, she was
sheriff during Prohibition And she would go down
the streets of Bryan and confiscate all the
whiskey that was being bootlegged and pour it down
the streets of Bryan, as she said. So they all liked
her pretty well? I mean, she didn't meet with any
resistance for being a woman sheriff? No, in fact,
I guess you could say she was one of the first
women's laborers. But she enjoyed being a
sheriff. enjoyed it quite a lot. She liked law
enforcement. And the women and men of the town
accepted her as such. And she did a very fine job.
Right before she died, about five years ago, she
was honored in Bryan and received a plaque and a
medal and everything, showing that she was the
first woman sheriff and that the historians of the
town did appreciate her contributions to the
city. That's pretty interesting that they would
accept her so readily. It seems like all the people
at Bryan and College Station are somewhat on the
conservative side. You know, a woman's place is in
the home. Is that basically, would you say, the
character of most people that live in Bryan? Would
you say it's a conservative area? Yes, very much
so, particularly Bryan more so than College
Station. I think a lot has to do with the College
Station, the education influence and the vast
mobility of the people in College Station tends to
make it a more liberal area, whereas Bryan is a more
conservative area. I know when I went to school
here, you could tell that by the school systems,
that Bryan was a much more conservative school,
say for instance, just in their dress code,
whereas College Station's dress code wasn't
nearly as defined as Bryan's was. In fact, they
even slipped to not even having one, I believe,
during the later years. You graduated from A&M, is
that right? Yes, in 75. And what was your degree in?
English and history with a teaching certificate
education. A teaching certificate. Do you know
much about the educational facilities or early
education programs in Bryan College Station
areas?
Not a whole lot. I know in talking with my mother
when she was growing up, she's now in her late 40s.
And when she was a young child, for instance, they
did have country schools out in St. Paula and
around the surrounding communities. And in fact,
she even had to start school a year early because
she was the only one her age. And they didn't want to
have just one person in first grade. So she had to
start at age five and go in with all the six year
olds. I know Fannin, which is now an elementary
school, used to be the high school. In fact, she
graduated from Stephen F. Austin, although it was
in the Fannin building at that time. The new high
school in Bryan, was that built when you graduated
from there? Did you graduate from Bryan High? No, I
graduated from Stephen F. Austin. From Stephen F.
Austin. I was in the last graduating class in May of
71 from Stephen F. Austin.
Then we integrated after that, and Kemp was the
black high school and Seminole-Austin the white,
and we integrated and joined forces at Brown High.
And joined forces. Did that particular
integration, did you have any problems? Like,
say, you know, the big race riots in Houston. How
did the people here take the integration of the
schools? with mixed emotions, I guess I could say.
I don't know if it was directly from the
integration itself, but I know that the school
system as a whole, the teaching of the material and
everything, or the material that has been taught,
has lowered. And the standards, I think, of our
education have been lowered by a deal. I don't
think it's nearly as good as it used to be. That's
interesting. Are there any particular reasons? I
mean, you know, why you don't think it's as good as
it used to be? Did they just slow the whole process
down, or, you know, can you say? Well, I really
don't know. I know I went back and taught for a while
after I graduated, but I
don't know if it's completely to do with the
integration or not, But I know the whole attitudes
of the students have changed. It may just, quote,
unquote, the new generation, although I hate to
think that a new generation is coming up and I'm
getting that old. But now we don't have dress
codes. The kids can come to school as long as
they're not indecently exposed. And I think that
takes away from the rigidness of a school system.
And it's not all bad, but yet at the same time, I like
the more formal education. Maybe it's because of
my conservative upbringing from this area.
How about you personally? Do you have any
particular reason for choosing the Bryan College
Station area you need to live in? I really didn't
choose when I was born into it. Do you ever feel like
you'd like to get out? Yes, I'd like to continue my
education and get my master's. So my master's
should be finished in May of 77. And I do think that I
would like to move and become, I want to stay in the
university system since I've been here and I've
got my assistantship working in student affairs.
And I'd like to be a somewhere working either as an
assistant dean of students or somewhere in
student personnel work at some other university,
but I think that I need to get away and get some new
and different ideas. It is a good town. I may
eventually come back here, but still being young
and single, as I might say, I would like to do a
little bit of exploring on my own. From your study
of the Bryan College Stationery Do you know of any
particular catastrophes or tragedies, anything
like this that's happened that might be
interesting?
Well, in the early years, I know we've had
pneumonia epidemics that killed out a lot of
people and things like this. But in my own
lifetime, I can remember... what we call the big
fire, which was the Montgomery Ward building
downtown burned. I can't remember the exact year.
It was probably in the early 60s.
It burned, and to me it seemed like that was the
first step in the death of downtown Bryan because
this was the first major move. The fire was, there
was no way to control it, Everybody in the town just
stood around and watched it burn. It was a huge
building. In fact, the lot is still vacant. There
was nothing ever rebuilt there. And Montgomery
Ward's moved out to where it is now. And Manor is
small. And I think that was the coming of the malls
and the beginning of the death for downtown of
towns and cities. Were there ever any days where
the downtown of Bryan was the teeming
sub-metropolis, I guess you'd say, like you see in
the movies? you know, of, like, gun smoke. You
know, can you visualize that? You mean way back in
history? Yeah. Oh, yeah, I've got pictures from my
grandparents. And I can remember my grandparents
talking about loading up the wagon. And it took
forever, I guess, in a wagon. I know that right now
they're about five miles out of the city limit, but
I guess to downtown Brine it would be about... 10
miles or so, and I guess it did take quite a long time
to come into town. But we've got pictures where the
wagons and the people are just all over the streets
of Brown. And even as a kid, before we went to this
mall system that I think our society has gone to
with the various stores at different locations in
the city, as a child, downtown was the place to go.
That's where all the stores were. You had your
local drug store that had its soda fountain. You
had the Woolworth's store and just everything
focused around downtown. I noticed some of the
buildings in the Bryan downtown area are fairly
old buildings. Do you know anything about the
architecture of the area or any particular
buildings in the history of Bryan College Station
that would be interesting?
I know that, okay, like, Some of the banks had some
of the old buildings. If I'm correct in thinking, I
think that the City National Bank, what's now out
on Texas Avenue, and there was a semi-modern bank
in downtown Bryan, and if I'm correct in my
thinking, they also had one of the old buildings. I
believe it's where ANCO Insurance is now, and you
can still see engraved on the building in the
stonework the name of the bank. Talking about
architecture, though, there's an interesting
story that my dad has told me that there are two very
large, well, there were two very large homes here
called the Aston States. One of them that a lot of
people might know was WC's on Texas Avenue. It was
an old estate that was turned into a club. The Aston
brothers came here years and years ago and sort of
made a rivalry between the two brothers just to see
who could build a better house. And one Aston
estate was on Texas Avenue, and the other Aston
estate is back on 25th Street. And they decided to
see who could build the better home. And in looking
at the two, the one on 25th Street won out. Hands
down. Right. It was really a fine house. What was
that? or the professions of the Aston brothers. Do
you know what they did? They dabbled in a little bit
of everything. In fact, Parker Aston Hardware
store that is still here was begun by one of the
Aston brothers. And while we're talking here, I'm
thinking of other little stories. Go out ahead.
Brazos Briscoe, Mr. Briscoe told me this himself.
He was a real good friend of my dad's, and I'm sure
anyone that's familiar with the area. Is this the
Briscoe lumber? Mm-hmm. They were of Italian
descent and raised cotton out in the bottom, and
that's where they made most of their money, right
there. Anyway, Mr. Brazos came up. over here from
Italy with very little money and at one time one of
the Aston brothers really got on his back and
cheated him out for being a no good Italian with no
money at all and really gave him a hard time and Mr.
Brazos vowed that someday he would own everything
that the Aston brothers ever owned and as Mr.
Brazos built up his cotton industry and began
selling cotton everything like that, he
gradually picked up and bought everything that
the Astin brothers ever had, except for one thing.
Mr. Briscoe died very suddenly about five or six
years ago, and the only thing that he had lacked
buying was the Astin estate over on 25th Street,
and it's just because Mrs. Astin had outlived him
And she soon died about six months after Mr.
Virisco did. And the stay has since been taken care
of by the trustees at the bank. That's an
interesting story. You said that Mr. Virisco was
Italian. Is that pretty much a trend? Were there
many Italian immigrants in this area? Yes, we've
got a lot of people of Italian descent. You can tell
by the names, Scamardo, Ruffino, Restivo,
Berisco, Scamardo. We've got them all. We've got a
lot of Italians here. I think the majority of them
were in the cotton industry, which was a very big
industry here. In fact, we've still got a lot of
cotton down the bottom today. We also have a lot of
people of Spanish descent, which I'm sure has been
due to people moving out of Mexico and moving
north. Then we've got, like, my mom is Scotch
Irish, so we have people of that descent also, and
just a whole mixture. But we do have a strong
Italian and Spanish influence here.
You mentioned the fact that the Ashton brothers
made a lot of their money in cotton. And it was one
time a thriving business here. Are there any other
businesses that you can think of that were? Well,
Vrisco was the one that made cotton. Oh, Vrisco
was? Vrisco's the one that made cotton. Okay. I'm
not really sure where the Aston started. They may
have started cotton also. But I do know them, like
the hardware store and many other things. And I
believe a lumber company also. Let's see, other
industries.
Cotton and farming and cattle primarily, I think,
before you get into the more industrial type thing
of the 20th century. Of course, now we've got
several industries in more modern times.
You mentioned Lila Withers was a famous person in
your background. Do you have any others? Maybe not
in your particular background, but particular
individuals that you know of? that may have left
their mark on the area. Yeah. In fact, I've got one
relative that I'm very proud of. I'm sorry you
hadn't done a little bit better. I don't know if
you're aware of it or not, but my name is Tommy Lee
Moorhead, and the Lee has a very significant
purpose for being in my name. On my mother's side,
we are direct descendants from Robert E. Lee, And
one child out of every generation carries the
middle name of Lee. I carry it. Then my uncle, my
mother's older brother, was named Alan Lee. And
then my grandfather's name is Roy Lee. And it just
goes on back. All the way down. Were your
descendants, well, not your descendants, I guess
your predecessors, were they involved in the
Civil War? Did they fight? I know you mentioned
something about your... You had a letter or
something? Yes. We were definitely pro-South.
Pro-South. We were definitely Southerners and
rebels. The war of northern aggression. Right.
Yes, let's see. I've got to figure this out now.
We have a letter that was sent to my great-aunt's
mother. So would that be my great-great-aunt?
great-aunts mother yes I don't know it was my
great-aunts mother her husband was away fighting
in the Civil War and wrote a letter back to her and
her oldest daughter at that time we called petty
she was just a small baby and he was writing back
saying how much he missed her and everything, how
the world was going, and that he missed his wife and
Patty
very much. What would you say is the chief means of
livelihood for most people in the Bryan College
Station area after the farming and ranching of the
early years? What would you say during the 1920s?
during that age around World War I? We didn't have
very much industry as such. Like so many people
were so conscious of the war effort and helping
supply things for the war. But I guess just small
businesses and we do still have a lot of cotton and
farming going on around the edges of the community
here. I guess I should say city we're growing so
much. It was a good area for people to get a start. I
know my dad came here without a high school
education or high school diploma and was able to
start his own store and build it up. He started in 46
and so he's celebrating his 30th year of business
now. And he's been able to build it up to a
corporation and be a very successful businessman
And it was a very good area and very appealing to
people that wanted to start out and do something on
their own. What business is your father in? He's in
the glass business. He has Acme Glass Company
incorporated in the area. You mentioned the war
effort and people all geared toward the war. Do you
know anything about this that you could tell us?
Not really specific, so I'm sure that... I'm
talking about World War I or World War II. It
doesn't matter. Okay, I know they took people,
like my grandfather went to World War I. I really
don't know if the area did anything for a specific
cause except exist and try to make it through both
wars. During the Depression, I know here a lot was
done to... The farmers were the ones that really
made out the best and furnished food for other
people. In fact, the farmers, it's similar to the
Waltons, I guess you'd say, because they always
had plenty to eat, never much money, but plenty to
eat, and it was a good time to bargain with the store
people with food rather than money. Kind of switch
tables on them. Mm-hmm. This year is, as you know,
the bicentennial, a lot of celebrations and
things going on like that. Can you remember any
celebrations in particular, Bryant area, big
shindigs? Well, unfortunately, this is a very
mixed community. I mean, it's fortunate. I don't
know. We've got a lot of influence from a lot of
different background cultures, but we're not so
much like a completely German community like, for
instance, New Braunfels has their worst fest and
everything. But I do remember one celebration
that was a lot of fun for me as a child. I was about
nine years old, I guess. I don't remember the exact
year. I should because I've lived here all my life.
But Brian celebrated their centennial. And you
could go to the merchants and get wooden nickels.
And then on one special night, or it was really
about a week, I guess, there, We dressed up in
centennial costumes. One particular day, I can
remember, was the official celebration day. We
dressed up in our centennial clothes. The women
wore centennial dresses with the hoops on. In
fact, it was the first time I wore a hoop. Don't ever
try to sit down in a hoop dress. You end up catching a
hoop right in your face. We dressed up in our, you
know, costumes and everything and had a real good
time and you could buy things with the wooden
nickels and the men had to grow beards and we had a
jail out in the street and we had a street dance. And
it was a lot of fun. People rode their horses in the
town. It was a good, fun celebration. In fact, I can
remember thinking I wish I could be, you know,
around for the next centennial because it seems
like I would have gotten more out of it. However,
I've been too old to get very much more out of it. But
it was something that I really had a lot of fun and
enjoyed. It was neat. You talked about how
conservative this area has generally been
historically. What factors can you name or give us
that would seem to support this? Well, the whole
South, I think, really is conservative. Texas is a
fairly conservative state, I think. So that is a
lot from where it stems. In this particular
community, though, I think we had two very severe
impressions from the standpoint that, okay, we
had A&M, which was a military school here, that
started, as everyone well knows, in 1876. And then
also later, later too, we had another military
school that was founded by Nat Allen called Allen
Military Academy. And this was not exactly a
reformatory school, but it was a military school
as such that went from the sixth grade through, it
was a, I can remember it being a, junior college. It
took you to the first two years of college and then a
lot of people transferred from Allen over into
A&M. But now it's just from the sixth grade or it
changed then from the sixth grade to twelfth grade
and now it's just a private school more so than a
strict military school. Where was this located?
It's over in North Bryan, about on 22nd Street,
because we lived on 23rd when I was very, very
young. That was when my parents first lived, after
they got married. And it was about four blocks from
our house. It's still there today. Is it an
all-male type? Mm-hmm. When it was military. Now
it is open, and it's co-educational. And it's all
grades starting even in elementary school, I
believe, now. It's simply a private school. And a
lot of, I know when we had immigration, a lot of
parents put their children into Allen. But of
course, students still come from all over the
world and go to Allen Academy. Speaking of, you
know, the educational institutions, of course,
the biggest one in this area is college here. And
what... What effect do you think that the school
has had on the Ryan College Station area?
Well, I'm most familiar with the effect that the
school has had on the area, I guess, since Earl
Rudder was president. In the past, I know it had a
varying effect on the area in the fact that it did
supply a nine-month population boom every year.
although it wasn't much back then, but it still was
an input of people that helped the businesses in
town with their selling of merchandise. They were
good customers to everyone. But even more so now, I
think it has helped make Bryan College Station a
spot on the map. As it changed from a college into a
university and became more diversified, and has
grown larger. It has brought an intense
amount of students here. It's brought a lot of
faculty and staff. It's really helped the
community go, not so much from the educational
standpoint, but I think a lot, too, from the
research that is carried on here. It's brought a
lot of people here into the area. And as we have more
here, I've noticed more industry come in, for
example. like more business forms. Well, we've
had a Linco here for several years. We've had
International Shoe Factory here for years. A lot
of industry is coming into the area. We've had our
industrial park set up in the last three years.
Hold on there. What's bypassed? I guess maybe the
last ten years, really. Time seems to fly so much. I
really don't have all my dates straight, but... It
has grown in my lifetime considerably. I can
remember they used to say, in fact, it's still on
the street signs. I think it's supposed to be four
or five miles from College Station to Bryan. I can
remember when there was that definite, distinct
difference where Piggly Wiggly and A&W Root Beer
and all these things used to stand. It was country.
there weren't businesses and homes everywhere
like there are today. Was Texas Avenue still where
it is, though? Was it still the main road that
connected the two? Yeah, but it used to be a lot
skinnier. Was it paved? Yeah, well, I'm sure a long
time ago it wasn't, but as long as I can remember, it
has been paved. But, for instance, the street that
we live on now, which now is right in the heart of a
residential area, I can remember more.